README.md, before:

# Oil Spill Segmentation using Deep Encoder-Decoder models
##### [Abhishek Ramanathapura Satyanarayana](https://orcid.org/0009-0003-1248-0988), [Maruf A. Dhali](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7548-3858)


## Paper available on ArXiv
* The results of this research is available in the [ArXiv paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01386).


## Info about the project
* This repo contains the project work done as part of the [HTSM Masterwork](https://www.rug.nl/education/honours-college/htsm-masterprogramme/about-the-programme) at [University of Groningen](https://www.rug.nl/).
* Research work carried as part of the HTSM Masterwork to train deep learning CNN model for segmentation task to detect oil spills from the satellite
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data.
* This research is towards application of AI for good, particularly towards conservation of nature with AI.
* This project was done under the supervision of [Mr. Maruf A. Dhali](https://www.rug.nl/staff/m.a.dhali/)


## Dataset information
* The details about the dataset used in this Masterwork project can be found here - [dataset details](https://m4d.iti.gr/oil-spill-detection-dataset/).
* This dataset contains labels for 5 classes --- sea surface, oil spill, oil spill look-alike, ship, and land.
* ThIs dataset is a relatively smaller dataset when compared to other popular benchmark datasets for the segmentation task.


## Required dependencies for training
* To install pytorch use the following command
```
pip install torch==1.12.1+cu113 torchvision==0.13.1+cu113 torchaudio==0.12.1 --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu113
```
* The other required dependencies for training are available in [requirements.txt](requirements.txt).


## Instructions to run the code for training
* For any python script, use the following to list all the command-line options
```
python3 script_name.py --help
```
* Run the script [src/training/compute_stats_for_train.py](src/training/compute_stats_for_train.py) to
compute the statistics for training set. This will generate [src/training/image_stats.json](src/training/image_stats.json)
with the mean and std. dev. of images in the training set.
* To train the models, run the script [src/training/train.py](src/training/train.py).
* To compute the k-fold validation metrics, run the script [src/training/compute_kfold_validation_metrics.py](src/training/compute_kfold_validation_metrics.py).
* Run the notebook [src/training/EDA.ipynb](src/training/EDA.ipynb) or the script [src/training/exploratory_data_analysis.py](src/training/exploratory_data_analysis.py) to generate the plot of class distribution in the dataset.
* For plotting the variation of loss, accuracy, IoU during the training phase, use the notebook [src/training/plot_graphs.ipynb](src/training/plot_graphs.ipynb).
* To infer on the test set, run the script [src/training/inference.py](src/training/inference.py).


## Docker deployment instructions
* The streamlit [app](src/app.py) has been developed for deployment.
* The detailed python package requirements for the streamlit app can be found in [src/requirements_deployment.txt](src/requirements_deployment.txt).
* To build the container, run the following command inside `src` directory
```
docker build -t app_oil_spill .
```
* To the run the container, run the following command inside `src` directory
```
docker run -p 8000:8000 -t app_oil_spill
```


## Huggingface deployment
* A streamlit application, with the best performing model, has been deployed to [Huggingface](https://huggingface.co/spaces/abhishekrs4/Oil_Spill_Segmentation)


## Qualitative results - sample test set predictions
![Sample predicted mask 1](images/pred_mask_img_0001.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 2](images/pred_mask_img_0007.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 3](images/pred_mask_img_0035.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 4](images/pred_mask_img_0054.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 5](images/pred_mask_img_0105.png?raw=true)
* Since the dataset is not publicly available, the original test set images from the dataset are not uploaded but only their predictions are included in the repo.


## Quantitative results
* The best model's class-wise and mean IoU performance is presented below.

class  |  class IoU (%)  |
-------|-----------------|
sea surface  |  96.422  |
**oil spill**  |  **61.549**  |
oil spill look-alike  |  40.773  |
ship  |  33.378  |
land  |  92.218  |
**mean IoU**  |  **64.868**  |


## Sphinx docstring generation
* The following are the steps to generate docstrings using sphinx
* Create a directory named `docs` and go to that directory
```
mkdir docs && cd docs
```
* Run the everyone of following commands inside `docs` directory
* Run the following command with appropriate options
```
sphinx-quickstart
```
* Open the file `index.rst` and add `modules` to it
* In the file `conf.py`, make the following changes
  * set `html_theme = 'sphinx_rtd_theme'`
  * set `extensions = ["sphinx.ext.todo", "sphinx.ext.viewcode", "sphinx.ext.autodoc"]`
  * add the following to the beginning of the `conf.py` file
  ```
  import os
  import sys

  sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath(".."))
  ```
* Run the following command
```
sphinx-apidoc -o . ..
```
* Create html files with documentation
```
make html
```


## References
* [HTSM Masterwork](https://www.rug.nl/education/honours-college/htsm-masterprogramme/about-the-programme)
* [https://m4d.iti.gr/oil-spill-detection-dataset/](https://m4d.iti.gr/oil-spill-detection-dataset/)

Commit message:

updated readme with citation and link to the ICPRAM 2025 paper

README.md, after:

# Oil Spill Segmentation using Deep Encoder-Decoder models
##### [Abhishek Ramanathapura Satyanarayana](https://orcid.org/0009-0003-1248-0988), [Maruf A. Dhali](https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7548-3858)


## To cite this work
* Use the following to cite this work
```
@conference{icpram25,
author={Abhishek Ramanathapura Satyanarayana and Maruf A. Dhali},
title={Oil Spill Segmentation Using Deep Encoder-Decoder Models},
booktitle={Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Pattern Recognition Applications and Methods - ICPRAM},
year={2025},
pages={741-748},
publisher={SciTePress},
organization={INSTICC},
doi={10.5220/0013259600003905},
isbn={978-989-758-730-6},
issn={2184-4313},
}
```

## Paper available
* The paper that outlines the results of this work has been accepted at ICPRAM 2025 conference in the industrial applications section because of the 
impact the work has in the remote sensing industrial applications domain. The link to the [ICPRAM paper](https://www.scitepress.org/PublicationsDetail.aspx?ID=vkytS8s+DA8=&t=1)
* An older version of the paper with the results of this work is also available in the [ArXiv](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.01386). This will be updated soon.


## Info about the project
* This repo contains the project work done as part of the [HTSM Masterwork](https://www.rug.nl/education/honours-college/htsm-masterprogramme/about-the-programme) at [University of Groningen](https://www.rug.nl/).
* Research work carried as part of the HTSM Masterwork to train deep learning CNN model for segmentation task to detect oil spills from the satellite
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data.
* This research is towards application of AI for good, particularly towards conservation of nature with AI.
* This project was done under the supervision of [Mr. Maruf A. Dhali](https://www.rug.nl/staff/m.a.dhali/)


## Dataset information
* The details about the dataset used in this Masterwork project can be found here - [dataset details](https://m4d.iti.gr/oil-spill-detection-dataset/).
* This dataset contains labels for 5 classes --- sea surface, oil spill, oil spill look-alike, ship, and land.
* ThIs dataset is a relatively smaller dataset when compared to other popular benchmark datasets for the segmentation task.


## Required dependencies for training
* To install pytorch use the following command
```
pip install torch==1.12.1+cu113 torchvision==0.13.1+cu113 torchaudio==0.12.1 --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/cu113
```
* The other required dependencies for training are available in [requirements.txt](requirements.txt).


## Instructions to run the code for training
* For any python script, use the following to list all the command-line options
```
python3 script_name.py --help
```
* Run the script [src/training/compute_stats_for_train.py](src/training/compute_stats_for_train.py) to
compute the statistics for training set. This will generate [src/training/image_stats.json](src/training/image_stats.json)
with the mean and std. dev. of images in the training set.
* To train the models, run the script [src/training/train.py](src/training/train.py).
* To compute the k-fold validation metrics, run the script [src/training/compute_kfold_validation_metrics.py](src/training/compute_kfold_validation_metrics.py).
* Run the notebook [src/training/EDA.ipynb](src/training/EDA.ipynb) or the script [src/training/exploratory_data_analysis.py](src/training/exploratory_data_analysis.py) to generate the plot of class distribution in the dataset.
* For plotting the variation of loss, accuracy, IoU during the training phase, use the notebook [src/training/plot_graphs.ipynb](src/training/plot_graphs.ipynb).
* To infer on the test set, run the script [src/training/inference.py](src/training/inference.py).


## Docker deployment instructions
* The streamlit [app](src/app.py) has been developed for deployment.
* The detailed python package requirements for the streamlit app can be found in [src/requirements_deployment.txt](src/requirements_deployment.txt).
* To build the container, run the following command inside `src` directory
```
docker build -t app_oil_spill .
```
* To the run the container, run the following command inside `src` directory
```
docker run -p 8000:8000 -t app_oil_spill
```


## Huggingface deployment
* A streamlit application, with the best performing model, has been deployed to [Huggingface](https://huggingface.co/spaces/abhishekrs4/Oil_Spill_Segmentation)


## Qualitative results - sample test set predictions
![Sample predicted mask 1](images/pred_mask_img_0001.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 2](images/pred_mask_img_0007.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 3](images/pred_mask_img_0035.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 4](images/pred_mask_img_0054.png?raw=true)
![Sample predicted mask 5](images/pred_mask_img_0105.png?raw=true)
* Since the dataset is not publicly available, the original test set images from the dataset are not uploaded but only their predictions are included in the repo.


## Quantitative results
* The best model's class-wise and mean IoU performance is presented below.

class  |  class IoU (%)  |
-------|-----------------|
sea surface  |  96.422  |
**oil spill**  |  **61.549**  |
oil spill look-alike  |  40.773  |
ship  |  33.378  |
land  |  92.218  |
**mean IoU**  |  **64.868**  |


## Sphinx docstring generation
* The following are the steps to generate docstrings using sphinx
* Create a directory named `docs` and go to that directory
```
mkdir docs && cd docs
```
* Run the everyone of following commands inside `docs` directory
* Run the following command with appropriate options
```
sphinx-quickstart
```
* Open the file `index.rst` and add `modules` to it
* In the file `conf.py`, make the following changes
  * set `html_theme = 'sphinx_rtd_theme'`
  * set `extensions = ["sphinx.ext.todo", "sphinx.ext.viewcode", "sphinx.ext.autodoc"]`
  * add the following to the beginning of the `conf.py` file
  ```
  import os
  import sys

  sys.path.insert(0, os.path.abspath(".."))
  ```
* Run the following command
```
sphinx-apidoc -o . ..
```
* Create html files with documentation
```
make html
```


## References
* [HTSM Masterwork](https://www.rug.nl/education/honours-college/htsm-masterprogramme/about-the-programme)
* [https://m4d.iti.gr/oil-spill-detection-dataset/](https://m4d.iti.gr/oil-spill-detection-dataset/)
